the conflict in Gaza has also cast a
shadow over a controversial visit to
Germany by turkey's president Reep T
erdogan has been here in Berlin for
talks with German Chancellor Olaf
Schultz the two leaders voiced sharply
different views on the
war a handshake with a Stern looking
German president Frank valter Stein
Meer and then onto the chancell where
Olaf Schultz was waiting to greet toan
with a friendly
smile the usual images from a visit
between NATO
allies but as the two leaders spoke to
the media just before their talks it was
clear there was a wide Gulf between them
on the war between Israel and
Hamas I'm aware that we have different
indeed very different views on this
conflict that's hardly a secret and that
is even more of a reason for us to talk
particularly in difficult times we need
to speak directly face to
face look places of worship are hit
churches are hit hospitals are hit but
shooting hospitals killing
children these things are not in the
Torah you can't do that it is not in the
Declaration of Human Rights you cannot
do
it in recent weeks erdogan has made a
series of inflammatory statements about
the conflict calling Hamas Freedom
Fighters and Israel a terror state but
his tone in Berlin was more
conciliatory how can we solve this
problem how can we get a humanitarian
pors in the fighting how can turkey and
Germany make a contribution and how can
we take these steps
together Olaf scha concentrated on the
positives such as Anchor's constructive
role brokering a grain deal between
Russia and Ukraine and the importance of
trade between turkey and Germany but on
the war in Gaza his position was
clear if you know Germany you will know
our solidarity with Israel is unwavering
Israel has the right to defend itself
aligned with international
law at the same time we say every life
is equally valuable and this means the
suffering of the people of Gaza is
upsetting us as
well the two leaders said there were
plenty of other issues to discuss during
erdogan's very short visit migration
NATO enlargement and turkey's hope of
buying Euro Fighter war planes were all
on the agenda and if the Clash of words
over Gaza was kept to a minimum that in
itself may be counted as a
success
for more I'm joined Now by uran Aran
director of DW's Turkish service so uran
was in fact the Turkish president's
visit a success and if so for whom I
don't think so Michael that this visit
was a success for any of them neither
for uan nor for Chancellor schz because
I think that most of the topics are
talked in a kind of diplomatic way and
not very open and uh face to face I
think they had to um talk more deep
because in the past that uh eruan calls
Israel a terrorist State and calls the
Hamas resistant fighter
organization we can say that they are
like uh uh Boy Scouts something like
that and that's really ridiculous and I
think this kind of topics had to put it
out yesterday and there didn't no even
before erdogan arrived his visit was
roundly criticized here in Germany why
it's because of these kind of
Expressions that he did in the past it
wasn't just once I mean he did it twice
he did it two weeks ago in front of the
AKP members of parliament and on Tuesday
again he did it again in front of the
AKP U members and uh everybody shouted
for him and everybody screamed for him
because the relationship to Hamas is
very deep and therefore um erdogan was
very criticized in the past as a NATO
Ally he had to be side by side with all
these NATO members but he didn't and he
always make a Stepside and that's not
very healthy for all of
them um uron Schultz very publicly
addressed the major differences between
these two leaders how do you think he
mastered the delicate balance between on
the one hand resolutely standing by
German policy and on the other showing
warmth welcoming uh an antagonist of
that policy sure I think that Charles uh
didn't had any
other chance to react like this he did
yesterday but uh I think most of the
people most of the experts most most of
the journalists will say that Schultz
wasn't very very um aggressive he had to
be more um reliant on his standings uh
to Israel for example and uh against the
Hamas and he didn't do this very open um
and frankly I think he was he looked a
little bit weak uh he wasn't of course
he never smiled of course but I think he
should be more directly and more strong
against his opponent from Turkey but he
wasn't unfortunate talk about the
specific differences the diff the
specific uh topics that you keep
bringing up what should he addressed
much more specifically I think he should
much more addresses that Hamas is a
terrorist organization he did it but not
he just talked to the press and not to
uan he addresses that to the press and I
think that the freedom of press and
freedom of speech in Turkey should also
be a topic that he had to bring up
yesterday but of course the migration
issue the um the the deal the refugee
deal uh with the European Union is also
very important topic and of course these
kind of topics were um on the major hand
so that was um too less time to talk
everything and of course no official
press conference just two questions and
there was not very much should Schultz
have addressed anything in addition to
that Sweden NATO definitely I mean we
see that turkey desperately wants 14
Euro fighters from Germany and I think
on the other hand uh Germany will say
Okay so let's put Sweden into the NATO
and then we can discuss again and this
is also a very important thing and I
don't think that we are on the end of
the discussion it will go on for the
next uh couple of weeks or maybe a month
till we get a solution to in this issue
uran Aran head of head of director of DW
Turkish thank you so much
welcome